TITLE: Manage a contract - Integrity provisions
SOURCE_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/manage/manage-contract/integrity-provisions
CANONICAL_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/manage/manage-contract/integrity-provisions
DOC_TYPE: buyers_guide
AUTHORITY_RANK: 3
DATE_MODIFIED: 2026-01-31
---
Integrity provisions
As stated in the Ineligibility and Suspension Policy, offerors or contractors must provide written notice of any change to the information pursuant to subsection 13.1 of the Ineligibility and Suspension Policy .
These changes may include the list of names of owners, directors, individuals or entities that hold 5% or more ownership in a private corporation as well as partners, general partners, or trustees. This also includes any changes resulting from:
a transfer or assignment
new charges against the offeror
new conviction or other circumstance regarding itself, its affiliates, and its first-tier subcontractors
This information must be provided to the Registrar of Ineligibility and Suspension within 5 business days for all procurements, standing offers, supply arrangements, contracts or other instruments not yet awarded. The information must be provided within 22 business days for all awarded procurements, standing offers, supply arrangements, contracts and other instruments.
If non-compliance with Ineligibility and Suspension Policy clauses is discovered during a contract, you must evaluate the impact on operational requirements and consider the contractor's representation before deciding on actions like:
terminating the contract for default
setting aside the standing offer and terminating any call-ups
cancelling the supply arrangement and terminating any resulting contracts
If informed by the Registrar that a contractor is deemed ineligible or suspended, you must contact the Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC), Acquisitions Program Integrity Secretariat .
When a contract is terminated for default because of non-compliance with the Ineligibility and Suspension Policy clauses, you must provide the contractor with a notice period of at least 2 weeks. During this time, the contractor facing termination for non-compliance can argue their case to maintain the contract.
As an alternative to termination, a contractor may be required to enter into an Administrative Agreement with PSPC . This arrangement is at the discretion of the department.
Be aware of exceptions to PSPC internal approval authorities related to the approval of procurement instruments, contracts, standing offers, supply arrangements and contract assignments where the offeror or contractor has been determined ineligible or suspended.