TITLE: Financial considerations - Payment instruments
SOURCE_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/plan/financial-considerations/payment-instruments
CANONICAL_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/plan/financial-considerations/payment-instruments
DOC_TYPE: buyers_guide
AUTHORITY_RANK: 3
DATE_MODIFIED: 2026-01-31
---
Payment instruments
Clients are allowed to use the following methods, or payment instruments, to settle the payment of contractors’ invoices. The following table details the allowable payment instruments:
Payment instrument
Electronic?
Application
direct deposit
yes
domestic and international payments
acquisition card
(Visa and Mastercard)
Electronic Data Interchange ( EDI )
domestic payments
wire transfer
international payments
Large Value Transfer System ( LVTS )
all domestic payments over $25 million
cheque
no
petty cash
Electronic payment instruments is preferred. You may specify the client’s electronic payment instrument preferences in the solicitation document and resulting contract. Offerors can then indicate their capacity to accept the various forms of payment.
For more information on electronic payment instruments, consult the Receiver General for Canada functions: Government finances and Payment methods (accessible only on the Government of Canada network).
Direct deposit
Direct deposit is our preferred payment instrument. Contractors are strongly encouraged but not obligated to accept payment via direct deposit. Although direct deposit does not include remittance or stub information, the client can send payment details via email to the contractor. Contractors interested in this payment instrument must follow the enrollment steps with the client responsible for issuing payment. Typically, a void cheque is required to accurately document banking information.
Acquisition cards
Acquisition cards are credit cards, either Visa or MasterCard. The client will decide whether to use an acquisition card for the payment of contractor invoices or for payment at point of sale. Contractors do not have to accept them as a payment instrument. Acquisition cards may also be used for call-ups under certain standing offers. If you expect that the client may use an acquisition card for a call-up, include the applicable clause in the request for standing offer.
Electronic Data Interchange
EDI payments include remittance or stub information. The manner in which the contractor receives the information from its financial institution is determined between the contractor and its financial institution. The contractor must ensure their account is EDI -capable to receive payments this way.
Wire transfer
Wire transfer is often the most expedient way to transfer funds to a bank account in a foreign country. It allows payment in a currency other than the local currency of the destination country. Due to the high transaction costs to Canada, wire transfers should be limited to:
large value, low volume and time-sensitive payments
payments that need to be issued in a currency other than that of the destination country
Large Value Transfer System
Large Value Transfer System ( LVTS ) is an electronic wire transfer system used to transfer irrevocable payments in Canadian dollars within Canada. LVTS should be used mainly for large value payments. All domestic payments greater than $25 million must be issued with LVTS . LVTS transfers funds in real-time between participating financial institutions on behalf of clients, with the money immediately available to the contractor.