TITLE: Considerations for solicitations - Audit
SOURCE_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/create-solicitation/considerations-solicitations/audit
CANONICAL_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/create-solicitation/considerations-solicitations/audit
DOC_TYPE: buyers_guide
AUTHORITY_RANK: 3
DATE_MODIFIED: 2026-01-31
---
Audit
The provision for audit is an integral part of the procurement planning process.
This section outlines audit clauses, procedures and price certification processes applicable to various types of procurements, including those involving foreign contractors.
General audit clause
You must include a general audit clause in every contract. This clause requires the contractor to maintain complete and accurate records of the estimated and actual cost of the Work. This will allow Canada to inspect and examine the records upon request to determine that:
the Work has been performed and the price charged for the Work are in accordance with the contract terms
whether best value has been achieved for Canada
There are a number of circumstances where additional, specific provisions for audit (or validation) must be included in a contract. For contracts where the price is based on estimated costs (e.g., negotiated fixed price contracts) or actual costs incurred after contract award (e.g., cost reimbursable contracts), there may be a need to mitigate price risk. Additional audit or validation provisions are necessary to verify contract price and adjust payment as required.
Price certification clauses and discretionary audits
All non-competitive firm price contracts over $50,000, whether for the acquisition of commercial or non-commercial goods and services require the submission of a price certification by the contractor. All such contracts must also have a discretionary audit clause in the solicitation and contract documents.
This applies to all such contracts issued by Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC) and those issued by Canadian Commercial Corporation (CCC) on behalf of the United States Department of Defense (DoD) and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Except for contracts for which the price is based on tariffs fixed by public regulatory bodies and not subject to negotiation by PSPC.
Cost reimbursable contracts - certification and audit
In the case of cost reimbursable contracts, a price is not specified but will be determined after completion of the work. In accordance with section 34 of the Financial Administration Act , it is necessary for the appropriate authority to certify that the price, based on actual costs incurred when these are known on completion of the work, is reasonable.
The purpose of the reference, in all cost reimbursable contracts valued over $50,000, to the costs incurred being determined by government audit, is to provide a basis for such certification of the reasonableness of the price.
Contracts containing cost-reimbursable elements must contain an appropriate audit clause.
The cost reimbursable bases of payment are:
cost reimbursable with fixed time rate
cost reimbursable with incentive fee
cost reimbursable with fixed fee
cost reimbursable with fee based on actual costs
cost reimbursable with no fee
Upon completion, contractors must submit a cost submission to the buyer. This must be specified as a mandatory deliverable in the contract, except in repair and overhaul contracts, where it is discretionary.
Price certification and audits of contracts with foreign contractors
If a contract (or if a significant subcontracted portion) involves a contractor from a North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)-allied country, you should consider using the services of the foreign contractor or subcontractor's country’s government to conduct the audit. This helps ensure that the prices paid, or proposed to Canada, are considered to be fair and reasonable. You, as a PSPC buyer, can request this service through the Price Support Directorate (PSD). Forms and guidance on requesting these services are available on GCDocs (accessible only on the Government of Canada network - PSPC only).
Price certification services include the review of contractor proposals, subcontractor efforts and the execution of assurance engagements (cost audits).
Price proposal certifications are applicable to:
non-competitive proposals
single responsive offers from competitive tenders
amendments to competitively awarded contracts
Price certifications from foreign governments, typically provided as a high-level report, may be considered as opinions of the Government of Canada.