TITLE: Terminate or suspend a contract - Termination for convenience
SOURCE_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/manage/terminate-or-suspend-contract/termination-convenience
CANONICAL_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/manage/terminate-or-suspend-contract/termination-convenience
DOC_TYPE: buyers_guide
AUTHORITY_RANK: 3
DATE_MODIFIED: 2026-01-31
---
Termination for convenience
Canada may terminate a contract for convenience in accordance with the termination for convenience provision of the general conditions applicable to the contract.
You may terminate a contract for the convenience of Canada if:
the funding has been curtailed
a government program has been discontinued
a contract has been mistakenly awarded to other than the lowest responsive offeror
other circumstances make the procurement of the good or service unnecessary
Termination for convenience also applies when:
the client has requested termination
a termination for default cannot be considered because the contractor is not in default
a termination by mutual consent would not be more advantageous to Canada
Termination claims officer
The Price Support Directorate (PSD), Procurement Business Management Sector (PBMS) was designated to provide termination settlement services including the processing of claims associated with goods and services contracts terminated for convenience by Canada.
When a contract will be terminated for convenience in whole or in part, the PSPC buyer should involve the termination claims officer (TCO), PSD , PBMS immediately in the claim settlement process.
Refer to the lists below for details on the division of responsibilities between the buyer and the TCO regarding terminations of convenience.
The responsibilities of the buyer include:
preparing contract status reports
issuing stop work orders and notices of termination
administering the non-terminated portion of the contract
The responsibilities of the TCO include:
assessing the contractor's request for any upward adjustment of the contract price for the non-terminated portion of the contract
requesting the claim from contractor and forwarding claim forms
assisting the contractor with preparation of the claim
ensuring the acceptability of the claim
determining if an audit is required
defining audit requirements and arranging the audit
arranging for inventory verification and screening by the client
negotiating the final settlement with contractor
preparing the settlement and release document
forwarding the settlement and release document to the contractor for acceptance
obtaining the invoice and signed settlement and release document from the contractor
submitting the invoice through the client department
distributing the settlement and release document
Joint responsibilities of the buyer and TCO include disposing of surplus inventory with the client.
Preparing for contract termination
Occasionally, the client will require a contract status report before making a decision to cancel the contract. They will inform PSPC of their intention to reduce or cancel a contract by issuing a "notice of intent to cancel" to you. The client may request all or part of the following contract status information before making a final decision to terminate. This report includes:
the quantity of stores produced during the contract
the quantity of stores in production
the value of raw materials or components acquired by the contractor to carry out the specific contract
the position with respect to tooling and capital equipment, especially if the contractor had to tool-up to carry out the contract
the status of subcontracts
the most economical point to terminate the contract
the approximate amount of termination claims, if known
You must immediately request the information from the contractor and provide it to the client along with any recommendations.
Normally, the client's initial request will be to cancel all or part of the contract, in which case you should immediately issue a stop work order. A stop work order is a safeguard to ensure a halt in the work and remove the possibility of further expense being generated by the contractor. To terminate the contract, a stop work order must be followed by issuing a notice of termination for convenience.
Notice of termination
It is the client's responsibility to decide at what stage a full or partial termination should take place. You must not issue a notice of termination to the contractor until legal opinion is sought and the client’s formal requisition amendment confirming their decision to terminate has been received. In order to avoid further costs to Canada and hardship to the contractor, a notice of termination must be issued as quickly as possible to finalize the implications of the stop work order.
You should ensure that sufficient funds remain in the amended requisition to cover the contract value. You must not adjust the funds when issuing the notice of termination. The contract funds will be adjusted on the settlement and release document.
You will prepare the notice of termination or partial termination using the appropriate contract clauses and based on advice from Legal Services, send the notice of termination to the contractor.
After the notice of termination or partial termination is issued, you must immediately send a copy of the stop work order and notice of termination to the TCO .
No claim is involved
If the contractor advises you that a claim will not be submitted following the receipt of a notice of termination, you must remove the funding for the terminated items. Since no claim is made, the TCO is not part of this process.
Settlement negotiation and dispute resolution
This section provides information on the process for negotiating a settlement. By following these guidelines, you can manage settlements effectively and ensure all necessary adjustments are made.
Adjustment of funds
The TCO will adjust the contract funds on the settlement and release document.
For the non-terminated portion of a contract, if the contractor requests an upward adjustment to the cost or unit price, the resulting claim for the adjustment should be referred to the TCO for review before reaching an agreement with the contractor.
Termination file
For fully terminated contracts that are not complex you should send the complete contract file to the TCO . For complex procurements and partial terminations, where a portion of the contract is active, send an electronic copy of the following to the TCO :
the contract
all amendments
specifications
pricing details
pertinent correspondence
any other information relevant to the termination
Informing the contractor
If a claim is involved, the TCO will send the termination claim forms which includes the Procedures Guide – Processing Settlement Proposals Related to Contracts Terminated for Convenience to the contractor and follow-up to ensure receipt and that the necessary action is being taken to submit a claim.
The contractor must complete all sections of the forms in as much detail as possible. When the forms are complete the signed original is returned to the TCO , who will confirm receipt of the claim with the contractor.
If the contractor has any questions about termination settlement procedures or the presentation of the claim, they may contact the TCO directly.
Audit of claims
Upon receipt of a claim, the TCO will determine the need for an audit. If required, they will prepare the terms of reference and arrange for its completion. The TCO will also review the cost factors reported by the auditor and reconcile the contractor's claim with the auditor's report. The cost implications of any inventory adjustments should be discussed with the auditor and the contractor.
Surplus inventories
If any inventory is declared surplus by the termination, the TCO should send copies of the termination inventory schedules to the client to obtain disposition instructions. The costs associated with disposition, such as packaging, routing, and shipping, are a proper post termination charge to be added to the contractor's claim.
If there are discrepancies after inventory verification by the inspection authority or the recipient designated by the client, then the settlement offer may be adjusted by the TCO .
Disposition options include:
Arranging for verification and shipment of all or part of the inventory to a recipient designated by the client. The costs associated with packaging, routing, shipping, etc., are a proper post termination charge to be added to the contractor's claim
Arranging inventory verification (by the TCO with the inspection authority of the client) so that the settlement offer may be adjusted to reflect any inventory discrepancies
Arranging for the disposal of the residual inventory by GCSurplus
Before submitting the sales request (for surplus materiel and equipment) form to GCSurplus , the TCO will obtain certification from both the client and the director of the applicable PSPC contracting directorate. This certification will state that:
the inventories are reasonable in relation to the requirements of the terminated portion of the relevant contract
their use is not required for existing PSPC contracts, due to the nature of the goods, and
disposal is recommended
Any proceeds realized from the sale of the surplus inventory are credited (less the GCSurplus commission fee) back to the client, to the Consolidated Revenue Fund or the revolving fund as applicable.
Settlement offer, close-out and dispute resolution
The TCO is responsible for reviewing the audit report, if one was completed, and for negotiating a settlement offer with the contractor. This offer informs the contractor of the amount of the settlement the TCO is prepared to recommend to the executive director, Strategic Policy Development and Integration Directorate (SPDID) for approval.
Once the contractor accepts the proposed settlement offer, the TCO will prepare the settlement and release form, and submit it to:
Legal Services for review
the executive director, SPDID for approval and signature
the contractor for acceptance and signature
The contractor’s written acceptance of the settlement and release document and the final invoice are placed on the Price Support Directorate (PSD) file with a copy forwarded to you for your procurement file. A copy is also sent to the client to issue payment.
If the contractor rejects the proposed settlement, the TCO will advise the contractor, in writing, of the Alternate Dispute Resolution (ADR) services available through the Office of the Procurement Ombud. See Contract Dispute Resolution for more information.
The TCO will negotiate a settlement offer with the contractor that includes the settlement amount. If the contractor rejects the proposed settlement, the TCO can involve the group responsible for business dispute management.
Once the contractor accepts the proposed settlement offer, PSPC executives with the delegated authority can approve and sign the settlement and release documents. The TCO will send a copy to the contractor for their signature.
Payment of the settlement
When a partial payment or final settlement payment related to a claim on a contract terminated or partially terminated for the convenience of Canada is approved and signed by the executive director, Strategic Policy Development and Integration Directorate (SPDID), the TCO will:
place the original of the completed document on the Price Support Directorate (PSD) file and make arrangements to implement the approved settlement payment
send a copy to the client for payment
send a copy to the buyer for their procurement file
Claims arising from United States and Canadian Commercial Corporation contracts
Price Support Directorate (PSD), Procurement Business Management Sector (PBMS) is designated to handle claims arising from United States and Canadian Commercial Corporation (U.S./CCC) contracts being terminated for the convenience of the U.S. government.
For terminations involving U.S./CCC contracts, the executive director, Strategic Policy Development and Integration Directorate (SPDID), Strategic Policy Sector (SPS), will ensure compliance with the certification and termination settlement functions that are required to conform with the U.S. Department of Defense and Department of National Defence Letter of Agreement (see U.S. Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplements 225.870-6 and 249.7000 ).
The executive director, SPDID will also respond to requests from the U.S. government to arrange audits of U.S. government contracts or subcontracts placed directly with Canadian-based suppliers that are terminated for convenience.