TITLE: Special considerations - Procurement process initiated by client
SOURCE_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/approve/special-considerations/procurement-process-initiated-client
CANONICAL_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/approve/special-considerations/procurement-process-initiated-client
DOC_TYPE: buyers_guide
AUTHORITY_RANK: 3
DATE_MODIFIED: 2026-01-31
---
Procurement process initiated by client
As a PSPC buyer, you may sometimes be asked to process a requirement after the procurement process has already been initiated by the client. Examples of these requirements include:
sourcing
receipt of offers
offer evaluation
contractor selection
Ratification by Treasury Board
If a contracting authority enters into a contract without TB approval when such approval should have been obtained, ratification by TB must be sought as soon as possible.
The request for TB approval must include details on the circumstances, the type and value of the contact awarded, and whether it was possible to solicit offers. If contract approval is being sought for work already commenced, you must also include the client's certification that they had agreed with the commencement of work before the receipt of the TB approval . Where ratification is required due to an administration oversight, the corrective measures taken to minimize administrative oversights must be outlined in the request.
Ratifications within PSPC departmental authorities
For most ratifications of a PSPC procurement within PSPC ’s departmental authority, the approval authority level is based on the complexity level of the procurement.
As a PSPC buyer, you must seek approval from the approval authority level shown in the table below, if your procurement involves any of the following:
ratification of contractual commitments
a contract or amendment which includes a pre-contractual work clause
any other retroactive elements
For a confirming order, you must obtain approval at the director level or higher, as determined by the contract value and non-competitive contract approval authority limits. The limitation to non-competitive contract approval authority limits applies to all positions below the ADM.
Confirming orders and contracts involving pre-contractual work
PSPC does not normally place contracts to confirm the actions of the client and actively discourages this practice. However, as a PSPC buyer, you might have to become involved due to PSPC 's exclusive authorities for some types of procurements (goods, for example).
Requests for confirming orders and contracts for pre-contractual work are considered non-competitive and must be evaluated and processed based on the circumstances of each instance. Where the request is the result of attempts to circumvent normal procurement procedures, return of the request to the client should be a prime consideration.
If the work has been completed, Legal Services will prepare a confirming order to capture only the essential transaction details. These details include:
the parties involved
the work performed
the dates
the amount
a release
a transfer of intellectual property rights (if required)
If the work has started but has not been completed, you must:
Note : The contract cannot be backdated or retroactive under any circumstances.
Note: the client will remain liable for any complaints resulting from their actions.