TITLE: Prepare approval documents - Additional reviewers
SOURCE_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/approve/prepare-approval-documents/additional-reviewers
CANONICAL_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/approve/prepare-approval-documents/additional-reviewers
DOC_TYPE: buyers_guide
AUTHORITY_RANK: 3
DATE_MODIFIED: 2026-01-31
---
Additional reviewers
As a buyer, you are responsible for ensuring that procurement documents go through the necessary reviews and receive approval by the proper authorities or areas. You must consult various entities before or during the procurement approval process. Reviews may also be done on a discretionary basis, as required.
As detailed in the Plan section, some of these additional reviewers include:
a quality control officer
Legal Services
cost and price analysis services
Contract Security Program (CSP)
a risk management advisor
experts on socio-economic considerations
the group responsible for contract security
a fairness monitor
the client
You or the approval authority may request a review of the procurement documents by the quality control team of the Specialized Services for Procurement Division. This request should be made on the recommendation of the section Manager, by contacting Contract Quality Control , or Regional Quality Assurance . The appropriate team will provide written feedback.
Legal Services must be consulted when the buyer is considering a deviation from standard clauses, departmental standard procurement templates, or commodity or sector-based legally approved templates.
Legal Services must review any requests for lessening Canada's full rights at law, a disclaimer, limitation of the contractor's liability, or decrease in the warranty period. The proposed changes must also be acceptable to the client, and form part of the request for approval.
A review by Legal Services is within the discretion of the buyer or the approval authority, except in those instances that are mandated by policies and directives within the Acquisitions Program (for example, for sensitive requirements).
When a procurement presents any of the conditions noted below and described in the Directive on the Use of Cost and Price Analysis Services (accessible only on the Government of Canada network), it is mandatory that the buyer consult a Price Support Directorate advisor and document the consultation and pricing decisions in the procurement file:
Any potential sole-source procurement with a total estimated value of $7,5 million or more, including applicable taxes, options and amendments.
Any competitive procurement with a total estimated value of $7,5 million or more, including applicable taxes and options where only one compliant offer is received.
Any competitive procurement with a total estimated value of $7,5 million or more, including applicable taxes, with contract provisions for negotiated prices or where prices are likely to be negotiated as a result of a contract amendment.
Any competitive procurement, with a total estimated value of $10 million or more, including applicable taxes, options and amendments.
Apart from the above mandatory conditions where they must be consulted, Price Support Directorate advisors are always available for consultation on any procurement on a discretionary basis. Refer to the Guideline on the Use of Cost and Price Analysis Services (accessible only on the Government of Canada network) for additional information.
You must ensure that any contract security requirement is addressed in the approval documents and that the Contract Security Program (CSP) has been consulted, as appropriate.
Clients must:
Statement of Work
Statement of Requirement
specifications
evaluation criteria
Confirm by writing that their input is accurately reflected in both the solicitation document and Treasury Board submission
the generic matrix of responsibilities between PSPC and clients for the procurement of goods and services , or the client-specific agreements with the Department of National Defence
A procurement may require modifying or deleting certain conditions. These changes must be discussed with the client before being reflected in the solicitation, contract, standing offer or supply arrangement. This ensures the complete understanding of the extent of the client's rights and responsibilities.