TITLE: Prepare approval documents - Standing offers and supply arrangements
SOURCE_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/approve/prepare-approval-documents/standing-offers-and-supply-arrangements
CANONICAL_URL: https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en/buyer-s-portal/buyer-s-guide/approve/prepare-approval-documents/standing-offers-and-supply-arrangements
DOC_TYPE: buyers_guide
AUTHORITY_RANK: 3
DATE_MODIFIED: 2026-01-31
---
Standing offers and supply arrangements
The process for the creation, renewal, and extension of standing offers (SOs) and supply arrangements (SAs) is designed to ensure transparency, fairness, and efficiency. It involves collaboration between the buying organization and the category management team, specifically the category reviewer, throughout the procurement planning phase. This collaboration aims to expedite the endorsement process for SO s and SA s.
Category management team
The office of primary interest for specific goods and services is referred to as the "category management team".
Each team has a category reviewer responsible for endorsing the creation, extension or renewal of all SO s and SA s.
Early engagement with a category reviewer is encouraged to gain valuable input that can streamline the endorsement process for SO s and SA s. The list of category reviewers (PDF, 50.27 KB) (accessible only on the Government of Canada network) is provided by commodity group.
Submission requirements
Before proceeding with the creation, renewal, or extension of an SO or SA , a Category Management Request for Category Reviewer Endorsement form (DOC, 105 KB) (accessible only on the Government of Canada network) must be submitted to the appropriate category reviewer for evaluation and endorsement.
Consult the Decision Tree for Creation, Renewal and Extension of Standing Offers and Supply Arrangements (PDF, 60.45 KB) (accessible only on the Government of Canada network).
Endorsement scenarios
The category reviewer will evaluate the request and may subsequently:
endorse it without comments, or
endorse it, but with specific comments, recommendations, or conditions, or
decline it and provide supporting rationale.
Duplication
When endorsing a request that involves the duplication of an existing SO or SA , the category reviewer must provide supporting rationale.
Special endorsement cases
If a product or service does not fall under a specific category, the endorsement must be sought from a supervisor or manager in the National Capital Region (NCR) or a regional category reviewer outside the NCR .
Conditional endorsement or decline
If the request receives a conditional endorsement or is declined, it can be resubmitted after revisions have been made.
Documentation
The final decision and all related evaluation documents from the category reviewer must be included in the Contract Planning and Advance Approval (CPAA) document or procurement plan.